My name's Jill Willie, it's the first of August, and I'm speaking with Des Lloyd at his home
in Llanier. Right, Des, let's get started now. Let's talk about your early days in the
longhouse called Roundfield, I believe. Can you take us through the house, what it was
like if we walked through the front door?
Yeah, I can do. I was born there November 1943. They say if I'd have been a little bit later,
I'd have been called Guy, so that's giving a clue to my date of birth. Yeah, there were mom and dad,
obviously, and three of us. I was the middle one, the only boy, and I had a younger sister
and an older sister. Now, in those days, it was, how can I put it, there's so many different types
of Welsh longhouse. The cows were under the same roof. We both had a front door. There was only one
door for us and one door for the cows. Now, we lived in the one end. There were four rooms,
two downstairs and two upstairs, and then there was a solid wall in the middle so the cows couldn't
get at us, even though we could hear them at night. And they came in through their own door,
and there was tie-ins, as we say in Wales, for three cows in there. Now, above the cows
was what we called the tollant, where we stored hay for the winter. Now, this tollant, it wasn't a
very secure thing because there were sort of loose poles fixed in the wall, no boards or anything
like that. And on top of that, you put sort of loose hedging wood. It was old sticks or anything
like that. So when you were actually putting hay in there, you had to be very careful,
because otherwise you'd be down, if the cows were in there, you'd be on their back in no time and
you'd be in trouble. You'd be kicked. Anyway, the house, well, it was the front door for a time.
As I remember, when the wind used to blow from the east, it came all the way from Radnor Forest.
So there was a very useful implement employed at the bottom of the door, a feed sack,
stopped the wind coming in. But when the wind was strong, it used to blow it from the door.
We were absolutely freezing in there. There was the cooking equipment, was a black, what we call a
black-red grate. They did have an old boiler in the thing, but I think that was removed before
mum and dad came there. Incidentally, they came there in 1938 when they got married.
So mother used to do all her cooking on this open fire. She was a hook above it and she'd have a big
pot going on that. And there was an oven by the side of it, but you had to get a lot of fire going
to keep the oven going. So the oven was only used on a Sunday or when she was baking.
We managed. We had plenty of food because we obviously kept chickens, ducks and geese for
Christmas. And we had our own milk, mother made butter, never made cheese. And we almost had a
veg garden. And I shall say more about that later. We planted potatoes at a neighbouring farm in
exchange for doing work at any time when he wanted it sort of thing, which was one of the
things people did in those days. You were planting potatoes on a farm and then in the harvesting
weather you were, you paid back that way. But going back to the Welsh Longhouse, at the end,
we had the cows at the one end and joining that attached to it was the pigsty or pigs cot, as we
call it in Wales. And it was a pig at his little house. It was a slated roof, that was a pitched
roof. There's a pig, he's a very clean animal. He never soils in his own bed. He ought to come out.
He has his own little yard to do that in. And there was a wall around that. But above that,
there was a hole in the end of the house, obviously to get the hay in. And that was the only way we
could get the hay in. It was called the pitching hole. Anyway, when it came to harvesting time,
the only way we could do it, we used to take the door off the pig's house. The pig was banished to
his living quarters and told us to stay there. And then we put it across the walls. Then the
horse and cart, which we used then, was brought up alongside. And the man on the cart put it onto the
door. There was another man on the door who then lifted it through the hatch. And then there was
another man inside who had the most risky job, no health and safety then. And he sorted it out
inside. It worked very, very well. We never had any problems. Never any problems.
Going back to harvesting, they never had,
we never had any implements of our own until much, much later. So the farmer below us was an
excellent neighbor. And we obviously, Dad worked for him and I worked for him when I was older.
We always used to borrow his horse and cart. And he'd actually come and cut the hay for us with his
with his mowing machine. And it was pulled by two horses. They'd cut the hay. Then it actually
turned the hay with the horses. And we'd haul it with what we call in Wales, the gambo, which was
like a cart with four sticks at the end and then runners in the middle and big wheels and cart
horses. They weren't big cart horses. They were sort of a, they depended on speed really. They were
a cross between a Welsh Cob, I would think, and a big Shire. But they were, I can remember one in
particular, she was called Topsy. Now she was one of the most contrary women I've ever met.
She wouldn't do anything she was told. When we came to, if there was a large implement,
like what we use a horse rake in those days to get through a gate, and it was probably about
one inch each side, we knew damn well that she would not go through it without taking a run at
it. So we used to have to stop and reverse her through as otherwise there'd be no wheel left on
the rake. And another one of her traits was when we were unloading the hay, like say putting it
in on the door and then going up into the thing. And after that, when we had a three bay Dutch bar,
she used to be tied to the hedge while we were unloading. But she had her own agenda. And when
she heard the pike, which we were shifting the hay off with, hit the bottom of the cart,
she decided to reverse out on her own. So whoever was on the cart, if they weren't aware of what
was happening, they were on their back underneath. She had many, I shouldn't say it, a slap on the
backside for that, but she was a lovely old pony in her way, but she was a contrary lady,
there's no doubt about that. Well, I think those animals could really write a book on their own,
Des, and I'm sure you could as well. Well, that was an absolutely fascinating insight into
farming and the methods and the places of probably almost a bygone era, which we'll be.
Let's get back to you now and your early life. You lived in Llanier, but you didn't go to school
in Llanier. I understand there wasn't a school there. So what about your schooling? Where did
you go? How did you get there? The schooling? I went to the Oxford Road Primary School in
Llandrind at Wells. Now, I didn't, I think I started school when I was about six. And I can
remember my mum taking me first of all, and I wasn't very pleased with it. I wasn't very pleased
at all, but I soon got the hang of it. And then we used to have to walk. Mum used to come and
collect me, because only the elder children went on the bus. So we had to walk, but I soon got fed
up with that. And father purchased a bicycle for me for the sum of five pounds. And we're gentlemen
who since passed away a long time ago in Howey, but there we are. But unfortunately, it was too
big for me to reach the saddle. So the saddle was removed. A sack was tied around the frame. So I
wouldn't injure myself. We'll leave that to people's imagination. And I used to ride the bike to
school. And I soon got very used to this cycle. And at the time there was what we called the garage
corner. They used to have petrol pumps there. And there was a haulage business operating from
there. Now this corner is a right angle. So I could get as much speed as I could coming down
through the village. And then the object of the exercise showing off, of course, was to ground
the pedals on the road. And I had some impossible angles. Anyway, that was that. And I can remember,
well, there were two of us actually then. There was a lad I've been friends with for all of my life.
And we were told off for overtaking the school bus going down the Cwm pitches. By the bus driver,
Jim, I can remember him well. He wasn't the fastest in the world. He'd probably been faster
in reverse. But I can remember we overtook him going down the pitches. And then we were called
in to see the headmaster. And he said, we shouldn't do that, which was against the road regulations
or what have you. Anyway, going back to primary school. Primary school, yeah, I enjoyed that
up to a point. And then I passed the GCSE, whatever, no, the 11 plus in those days,
and went to the grammar school. And the grammar school then was up Wellington Road. It was the
grammar and the modern, as we called it then, together. Then after a couple of years,
that they built a new school, which is the present school. So I believe, and we moved down there and
the modern school, as they say, it stayed up there. Well, it sounds as though you and your friends
on those bicycles were really a force to be reckoned with. Yes. Well, let's get away from
education now. Let's get on to your working life. Would you like to tell us a little bit about that?
Yes, I joined the post office as a counter clerk in 1961. Now I was appointed, in those days,
it was a good job. Probably is now, I don't know. Anyway, I was appointed for Bills Wells.
My first experience was on the counter in Bills Wells. I wasn't there long in Bills because there
was a lad who was working in Llandrind and Wells, and he lived in Bills Wells. He wanted a direct
transfer back, so it suited me grand. So I was transferred to Llandrind and Wells. Now one thing
I remember, I was a very shy lad, believe it or not, when I started in the post office. I'd never
used the telephone in my life. I know people will find it hard to believe today with all this
modern technology. So one of the lads who was working with me or training me used to go into
the sorting office where the mail was, and he used to make phone calls and make me answer them
in the things so I get used to using the phone. I soon got the hang of it. I must admit I can spend
a lot of time on the telephone now. But one thing I've got to say, and if anybody's listened to this
who's in the radio area, I've got to give a great compliment to my old friend Harvey Pugh.
Harvey trained me in Llandrind and Wells, and he was very, very good to me. We remained friends
for practically the end of his life. I'm sorry, I didn't know he'd passed away until a few years
after. But there we are. But Harvey was very, very good to me. He trained me well.
One thing I remember, it was in the September of 61, and the International Six Days Motorcycle
Trials was based in Llandrind and Wells. So I had a quick baptism of all different languages,
people asking for this, people asking for that. But it was very, very interesting.
I really loved it because I obviously loved bicycles and motorcycles, and I've still got
a great collection of badges and memorabilia that the teams gave me when they were coming
into the counter. I can remember that very well. I stayed on the counter, and then in those days,
it was a head post office in Llandrind and Wells. We had the writing room where different tasks
were undertaken. There was a staff branch, or what they called, and then there was the wages
and the accounts and all that. I worked my way through that. Eventually I got promotion,
and I ended up as the staff, well, executive officer they called us, but now I believe they
call them HDs or whatever. By that time, we'd actually taken over Brecon area and Newtown area.
So the whole of my patch was Powys. It was from the Storey Arms, almost to Lake Burnway.
And I think there were about 200 staff altogether, varying from sub postmasters to postmen to
auxiliary postmen, county clerks, the whole works. And I really, really loved the job. You could go
out in the car in those days, and of course there were no mobile phones. Nobody could get hold of
you. You were your own boss. And one thing about it I've got to say is the sub postmasters, they
were a breed apart. Without exception, they were excellent. And the first thing, no matter what you
went to do in an office, you had to have either breakfast, tea, dinner or supper or whatever.
That was essential. No matter what, you had to have that. And I've always got on, well, I think,
got on well with people. I like talking to people, and I thoroughly enjoyed that element of the job.
At the end, I married a colleague, and then the post office was changing. It wasn't a service
industry as such. The way I saw it, and many others as well, it was to make money, and that was it.
Yes, there was a certain element of service, but it was certainly getting less and less.
And when the chance came to take redundancy, because Landrind and Wells was what we say then
regraded as a post office, I took redundancy with my wife, and we left. And that started another
chapter in my life. Before we go on to that other chapter, can I say you've obviously met a lot of
people, had a lot of experiences, and you're obviously a very quick learner. You could write
another book on that in itself, I'm sure. Can you talk about any interesting people, any unusual
people who used to deal with you professionally or perhaps just came in to buy stamps?
Oh, yes, I can. There were thousands. Winford Vaughan Thomas used to come in.
Winford Vaughan Thomas is probably well known. He used to come in on a Wednesday.
He was a chap with me. They were both in the Second World War, and I used to listen as a youngster to
the conversations, and it was wonderful to hear. But there were characters, numerous characters.
And there was a chap in Landrind and Wells. He used to come in. He was a betting man,
and he used to do his polls and that. He had a little dog with him. I can remember one Saturday,
the postman, what we had then was what we called the front office box. It was a letter box. You
put the letters in from outside, or you could put them in from inside. And it was always taken out.
It was a sack and emptied and taken through to be sorted. Anyway, the chap came out from the sorting
office, and he could see the little dog wandering around, and the gentleman was up at the counter
buying his postal orders, whatever you did in those days. And he took the little dog,
and he put the dog in the box, and he shut the door, and the dog was in the letter box.
Well, all hell broke loose then. Everybody was looking for the dog. You could hear the dog barking.
You couldn't find him. The chap was running in and out of the office. People were looking everywhere
for this dog. Eventually, somebody twigged that he was in the box, and the dog had to be retrieved.
That was a great one. And there was another one. We used to then close at half past six,
but then it was brought down to six o'clock. And there was a business
not too far away from the office in Llandrind and Wells. And we used to have to balance to the penny
every day then. And of course, when it came to half past five, things like that, we started writing
things down. And so we'd only have to just do a little bit, and we'd be balanced in 10 minutes.
And there was a chap, and he used to wait to the last minute. He'd wait till the last minute,
and he'd run down the street, and he'd come in, and he'd run all sorts of things like insurance
stamps and stamps. So if you'd written them down, I think he just did it for devilment.
Anyway, one day he was caught out. The gentleman who was the cleaner, he was in charge of shutting
the door, and the chap must have got his timing a little bit wrong. And I can see him now, and the
cleaner was at the door with a bolt in his hand, ready to put the bolt in, and he was running down
the street shouting, please don't shut the door, please don't shut the door. But he shut the door.
Say no more. Oh, there were numerous people, and lovely people. Yes, we used to have a few.
We would have a bit of a, perhaps a stern conversation, shall I put it with. But
the majority of people that came in then, they were old school, and we never had any problems
whatsoever. If you were good with them, they were good with you. But that's the way it should be.
Well, those are some of the many people who've touched your professional life, and
I'm sure you've got lots of very fond memories of your life in the post office.
Was there a noise or something? No, it was the postman. Oh, I see. He's found the bloody dog.
Right, let's continue now, Des, with the new venture that you and your wife went into.
I think it was something to do with cars, wasn't it? Obviously, a very much of a passion for you.
Yes, it was not cars. It was the Mini, the proper Mini, as we say, not the BMW so-called Mini as
they've got today. It was the Mini that was first produced in 1959. I'd always had a great interest
in cars, and I had a Mini. It was a Mini Cooper, and I always enjoyed fiddling with them, even
though I wasn't a trained mechanic. I'd worked with a lot of very, very good mechanics who taught
me an awful lot of things. When we left the post office in 1985, we decided to start our own little
business. Why not Minis? That was my wife and myself, and we were called the Mini Man and the
Mini Woman by many. The majority of our business were for youngsters. In those days, they couldn't
borrow money from the banks. The banks weren't lending, so whatever savings they had or whatever
their mum and dad would give them, they used to come to us. Mostly, they were their mum and dad.
Perhaps they hadn't even passed their test. They used to say, have you got a Mini, or can you
build a Mini for us? We used to find an old one and do whatever needed doing to it.
They'd have the Mini. It was a very personal business. As I say, even though my wife and
myself never had any children, our family was very, very large. Characters, well,
they were all mad. They were very, very quiet when they came here. They were driving perfectly.
Many of the time, a policeman has said to me, Dez, I saw one of your Minis going through Middleton
Street in Llandrindard Wells. It was doing much more than 30 miles an hour. I used to say,
well, that was sold four years ago. I can't drive every Mini. But that's it. I can remember one
tale in particular. It was a young lady. She was taught by her dad then how to check the oil.
Unfortunately, she was checking the oil when the car was on the uphill. She rang me one day and
she said, when I start my car, I can't see anywhere for smoke. Anyway, she brought the car here.
To cut a long story short, there should have been eight pints of oil in it. I think it was as much
as you could get in it. When she revved it up, the property across the field just disappeared in
smoke. I said, the next time you check the oil, make sure it's on the level. At least there was
plenty in it. We had a few here that when they took the dipstick out, there wasn't any oil in it at
all. Thankfully, even though some of the lads and the lasses had some horrendous crashes,
no one was hurt. That was the main thing. We did that for 15 years. But then, of course,
the banks were lending money willy-nilly, as they say, excuse the expression, Joe.
They didn't want to beat up all Mini then. Most of them, they wanted a GTI or whatever
was the going thing at the time. So our customers dwindled and we didn't want to go into anything
else. So we decided to call it a day. There was no point in working for the tax man.
We retired gracefully. What an interesting chapter of your life. I'm sure you touched
the lives of a lot of people and made a lot of friends and helped and influenced a lot of people
as well. Now, you say you weren't much of a mechanic. Well, I'm sure you were, but you were
a rallying person too, weren't you? Can you tell us a little bit about your rallying experiences
over the years? Yes, well, rallying. Well, my old friend, he's still going. He's struggling a bit at
the moment. He used to live on the next farm to me and he was very, very keen on cars. We grew up,
I've known him since he was six. I think he was always like me, a bit of mad as a box of frogs,
but there we are. Anyway, I can remember he had a Mini and he decided he was going to go racing.
The first meeting we both went, I went with him. It was at Landau down on the old airfield
at Cowbridge. I'd never been, I'm not ashamed to admit it, I'd never been far. So I had the
Batholomew Road Atlas navigating and my best glasses and we set off. Well, I think we should
have got there in about an hour and a half. It took us three by the time we negotiated everywhere.
Anyway, he enjoyed the meeting and after that he did circuit racing with Minis and we used to go
to Brands Hatch, Silverstone, Castle Combe, all those places. And then he decided he was going
rallying. He got the rallying bug. And so I did a lot with him on the rallying, but going back to
myself, I did quite a few road rallies and also as well organized rallies. And what we used to do as
well, a gang of lads, we always used to hire a mini bus or a couple of vans and we'd go to rallies
in Scotland, the Isle of Man and places like that. We really used to enjoy ourselves and we made an
awful lot of friends and I'm still enjoying rallying now. I still go out even though I'm
getting on a bit. I don't compete. I haven't competed for years, but I still know many of
the people and I still enjoy watching rallies with my old friend. There's only two of us left. There
used to be three of us. They used to call us the last of the summer wine, but unfortunately we lost
one last year to a heart attack. So that's life. So you just enjoy every day as you can.
Well, you can. It's obviously a very important part of your life, even though perhaps you're in
more of a spectator or specter, sedentary role at the moment, but I mean, you're still seeing
so many people who are enjoying it as much as you used to. Oh yes, I'm sorry to interrupt,
Jill, but yes, but rallying's changed now from a spectator point of view.
It's, you would call it probably now an anti-social sport and you're not allowed to go and watch where
you want to go. They've got designated areas for spectators and old people like me. I shouldn't say
that word. I know it's just a number, but we've always done and we will think we've got an element
of common sense. We always stood far enough back from the, and having done it yourself, you know,
what to do. But it's the way it's going and it has to be controlled. They have so many controls.
It's like health and safety. You don't do anything. It's got to be authorized for this,
authorized for that. And personally, I can see the writing on the wall and a lot of the rallying in
this country will cease, which is unfortunate because some of the rallies, they're quite big.
They bring an awful lot of money into the area, accommodation and federal and all the rest of it.
But what will happen is it'll vanish from this country and it will flourish in Ireland,
there's no southern Ireland, and also on the continent where there's not so many rules and
regulations. But that's my own personal view and I don't think I'm alone in saying that.
I suppose everything changes, doesn't it? Not always for the better. Des, it's been wonderful
sharing your experiences. We could talk all day, couldn't we? Before we finish off,
you're obviously a Radnish person through and through. Now, Radnish has their own dialect,
perhaps we could call it a language even. Now you've got quite a few up your sleeve. Can we
have some real Radnish expressions before we finish up? Well, Radnish expressions and
Radnish language, I'll just say before I've only got a couple because they just come in normal
conversation to me. There was a gentleman that taught me English in the grammar school in
Andoran and Wells, Mr. Peter. He was a wonderful gentleman and at that time there was a market in
Llanbad and Vannad and he used to go to Llanbad and Vannad and he used to sit there and listen to the
farmers talking and he used to say that he could hear many, many traces of the old Queen's English.
Anyway, that's as an aside. Now there's one, there's a couple here. Now this was one of my,
my dad always used to say this. If there was a problem or anything he used to say,
don't worry, it all brings night. And there's another one about somebody who was a bit mean.
You'll have to excuse the language. He used to say, well, he's as tight as a bull's bum in flytime
or variations on that. And if anybody was from the rural community would understand what I'm saying.
And there's another one when we were making hay before a thunderstorm,
you'd be a bit of loose hay on the ground and it would pick it up. And there was a couple around
here and they used to say, ah, this is the whiffle before the storm. In other words, the wind before
the thunder. And there's another one, which somebody who thought quite a bit of himself,
and you would say to him, where's the come boy through the glatt or over the hedge.
But most people would know if they were a radnisher, what a glatt is.
Yeah, it's usually tied up with string though, but that's another story. And there's another one,
everybody can manage a kicking horse except the bugger who owns him. And another one, he who
labours and does his best goes down the road along with the rest. And there are many, many more.
I'm sure you've got a lot up your sleeve. Des, thank you very much. It's been wonderful talking
to you. Thank you. Can I say, can I say thank you, Jill? It's been very, very,
I feel privileged to be able to do it because I said to you over the years that I've been doing
family history, the many, many people that have given up their time to talk to me and tell me
stories. Thank you very much. Well, thank you for sharing. Thank you.